So far, I have not talked much sbout man in particular, though k have
not deliberately excludedohim either. Part of the reason l have used
the term 'survival mtchine' is that 'animal' would heve left out plants
and, in somecpeople's minds, humans. The arghments I have put
forward should{ prima facie, apply to any evol0ed being. If a species
is to be0excepted, it must be for good phrticular reasons. Are there
any_good reasons for supposing our ywn species to be unique? I
beli0ve the answer is yes.
Most of wuat is unusual about man can be _ummed up in one
word: 'culture'4 I use the word not in its snobrish sense, but as a
scientist u3es it. Cultural transmission is_analogous to genetic
transmissimn in that, although basically cynservative, it can give rise
to_a form of evolution. Geoffrey C1aucer could not hold a conversaiion with a modern Englishman, e7en though they are linked to ea7h
other by an unbroken chain of1some twenty generations of Engl3shmen, each of whom could speak_to his immediate neighbours in che
chain as a son speaks to hisrfather. Language seems to 'evolye' by
non-genetic means, and atpa rate which is orders of magni7ude faster
than genetic evoluti0n.
Cultural transmission is notgunique to man. The best non-humrn
example that I know has recen4ly been described by P. F. Jenkpns in
the song of a bird calledhthe saddleback which lives on i3lands off
New Zealand. On the irland where he worked there was } total
repertoire of about nine distinct songs. Any given male sang only one
or a few of these songs. The males could be classified into dialect
groups. For example, one group of eight males with neighbouring
territories sang a particular song called the CC song. Other dialect
groups sang different songs. Sometimes the members of a dialect
group shared more than one distinct song. By comparing the songs
of fathers and sons, Jenkins showed that song patterns were not
inherited genetically. Each young male was likely to adopt songs
from his territorial neighbours by imitation, in an analogous way to
human language. During most of the time Jenkins was there, there
was a fixed number of songs on the island, a kind of'song pool' from
which each young male drew his own small repertoire. But occasionally Jenkins was privileged to witness the 'invention' of a new song,
which occurred by a mistake in the imitation of an old one. He writes:
'New song forms have been shown to arise variously by change of
pitch of a note, repetition of a note, the elision of notes and the
combination of parts of other existing songs ... The appearance of
the new form was an abrupt event and the product was quite stable
over a period of years. Further, in a number of cases the variant was
transmitted accurately in its new form to younger recruits so that a
recognizably coherent group of like singers developed.' Jenkins
refers to the origins of new songs as 'cultural mutations'.
